README.md, before:

# Possibly - Maybe monad for Ruby

[![Travis CI](https://travis-ci.org/asthasr/ruby-indubitably.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/asthasr/ruby-indubitably)

Maybe monad implementation for Ruby

```ruby
puts Maybe(User.find_by_id("123")).username.downcase.or_else { "N/A" }

=> # puts downcased username if user "123" can be found, otherwise puts "N/A"
```

## Installation

```ruby
gem install indubitably
```

## Getting started

```
require 'indubitably'

first_name = Maybe(deep_hash)[:account][:profile][:first_name].or_else { "No first name available" }
```

## Documentation

Maybe monad is a programming pattern that allows to treat nil values that same way as non-nil values. This is done by wrapping the value, which may or may not be `nil` to, a wrapper class.

The implementation includes three different classes: `Maybe`, `Some` and `None`. `Some` represents a value, `None` represents a non-value and `Maybe` is a constructor, which results either `Some`, or `None`.

```ruby
Maybe("I'm a value")    => #<Some:0x007ff7a85621e0 @value="I'm a value">
Maybe(nil)              => #<None:0x007ff7a852bd20>
```

Both `Some` and `None` implement four trivial methods: `is_some?`, `is_none?`, `get` and `or_else`

```ruby
Maybe("I'm a value").is_some?               => true
Maybe("I'm a value").is_none?               => false
Maybe(nil).is_some?                         => false
Maybe(nil).is_none?                         => true
Maybe("I'm a value").get                    => "I'm a value"
Maybe("I'm a value").or_else { "No value" } => "I'm a value"
Maybe(nil).get                              => RuntimeError: No such element
Maybe(nil).or_else { "No value" }           => "No value"
```

In addition, `Some` and `None` implement `Enumerable`, so all methods available for `Enumerable` are available for `Some` and `None`:

```ruby
Maybe("Print me!").each { |v| puts v }      => it puts "Print me!"
Maybe(nil).each { |v| puts v }              => puts nothing
Maybe(4).map { |v| Math.sqrt(v) }           => #<Some:0x007ff7ac8697b8 @value=2.0>
Maybe(nil).map { |v| Math.sqrt(v) }         => #<None:0x007ff7ac809b10>
Maybe(2).inject(3) { |a, b| a + b }         => 5
None().inject(3) { |a, b| a + b }           => 3
```

All the other methods you call on `Some` are forwarded to the `value`.

```ruby
Maybe("I'm a value").upcase                 => #<Some:0x007ffe198e6128 @value="I'M A VALUE">
Maybe(nil).upcase                           => None
```

### Case expression

Maybe implements threequals method `#===`, so it can be used in case expressions:

```ruby
value = Maybe([nil, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].sample)

case value
when Some
  puts "Got Some: #{value.get}"
when None
  puts "Got None"
end
```

If the type of Maybe is Some, you can also match the value:

```ruby
value = Maybe([nil, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].sample)

case value
when Some(0)
  puts "Got zero"
when Some((1..3))
  puts "Got a low number: #{value.get}"
when Some((4..6))
  puts "Got a high number: #{value.get}"
when None
  puts "Got nothing"
end
```

For more complicated matching you can use Procs and lambdas. Proc class aliases #=== to the #call method. In practice this means that you can use Procs and lambdas in case expressions. It works also nicely with Maybe:

```ruby
even? = ->(a) { a % 2 == 0 }
odd? = ->(a) { a % 2 != 0 }

value = Maybe([nil, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].sample)

case value
when Some(even?)
  puts "Got even value: #{value.get}"
when Some(odd?)
  puts "Got odd value: #{value.get}"
when None
  puts "Got None"
end
```

## Examples

Instead of using if-clauses to define whether a value is a `nil`, you can wrap the value with `Maybe()` and threat it the same way whether or not it is a `nil`

Without Maybe():

```ruby
user = User.find_by_id(user_id)
number_of_friends = if user && user.friends
  user.friends.count
else
  0
end
```

With Maybe():

```ruby
number_of_friends = Maybe(User.find_by_id(user_id)).friends.count.or_else { 0 }
```

Same in HAML view, without Maybe():

```haml
- if @user && @user.friends
  = @user.friends.count
- else
  0
```

```haml
= Maybe(@user).friends.count.or_else { 0 }
```

## Tests

`rspec spec/spec.rb`

## License

[MIT](LICENSE)

## Authors

* [Blake Hyde](https://github.com/asthasr) / [@asthasr](http://twitter.com/asthasr)
* [Mikko Koski](https://github.com/rap1ds) / [@rap1ds](http://twitter.com/rap1ds)

Commit message:

Update readme with newest changes.

README.md, after:

# Possibly - Maybe monad for Ruby

[![Travis CI](https://travis-ci.org/asthasr/ruby-indubitably.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/asthasr/ruby-indubitably)

Maybe monad implementation for Ruby

```ruby
puts Maybe(User.find_by_id("123")).username.downcase.or_else { "N/A" }

=> # puts downcased username if user "123" can be found, otherwise puts "N/A"
```

## Installation

```ruby
gem install indubitably
```

## Getting started

```
require 'indubitably'

first_name = Maybe(deep_hash)[:account][:profile][:first_name].or_else { "No first name available" }
```

## Documentation

Maybe monad is a programming pattern that allows to treat nil values that same way as non-nil values. This is done by wrapping the value, which may or may not be `nil` to, a wrapper class.

The implementation includes three different classes: `Maybe`, `Some` and `None`. `Some` represents a value, `None` represents a non-value and `Maybe` is a constructor, which results either `Some`, or `None`.

```ruby
Maybe("I'm a value")    => #<Some:0x007ff7a85621e0 @value="I'm a value">
Maybe(nil)              => #<None:0x007ff7a852bd20>
```

Both `Some` and `None` implement four trivial methods: `is_some?`, `is_none?`, `get` and `or_else`

```ruby
Maybe("I'm a value").is_some?               => true
Maybe("I'm a value").is_none?               => false
Maybe(nil).is_some?                         => false
Maybe(nil).is_none?                         => true
Maybe("I'm a value").get                    => "I'm a value"
Maybe("I'm a value").or_else { "No value" } => "I'm a value"
Maybe(nil).get                              => RuntimeError: No such element
Maybe(nil).or_else { "No value" }           => "No value"
```

In addition, `Some` and `None` implement `Enumerable`, so all methods available for `Enumerable` are available for `Some` and `None`:

```ruby
Maybe("Print me!").each { |v| puts v }      => it puts "Print me!"
Maybe(nil).each { |v| puts v }              => puts nothing
Maybe(4).map { |v| Math.sqrt(v) }           => #<Some:0x007ff7ac8697b8 @value=2.0>
Maybe(nil).map { |v| Math.sqrt(v) }         => #<None:0x007ff7ac809b10>
Maybe(2).inject(3) { |a, b| a + b }         => 5
None().inject(3) { |a, b| a + b }           => 3
```

All the other methods you call on `Some` are forwarded to the `value`.

```ruby
Maybe("I'm a value").upcase                 => #<Some:0x007ffe198e6128 @value="I'M A VALUE">
Maybe(nil).upcase                           => None
```

### Joining

In 0.3.0, there is new functionality to make it easy to "flatten" a nested `Maybe` structure:

```ruby
Maybe(Some(7)).join                         => Some(7)
Maybe(Maybe(Some(7))).join!                 => Some(7)
Maybe(None()).join                          => None()
Maybe(Maybe(None())).join!                  => None()
```

This is equivalent to `join` from the `Control.Monad` package in Haskell, or `x >>= id`.

### Forcing Value Dispatch

Unfortunately, some of the method names for `Enumerable` (and thus `Maybe`) clash with methods that you might want to call on the wrapped value. If you use an underscore at the beginning of the method name, it will be dispatched to the wrapped value:

```ruby
Some([2, 3, 4])._map { |n| n * n }          => Some([4, 9, 16])
```

This also has the side-effect of making it easier to call methods on nested structures without flattening them completely:

```ruby
Some(Some([2, 3, 4]).__map { |n| n * n }    => Some(Some([4, 9, 16]))
```

### Case expression

Maybe implements threequals method `#===`, so it can be used in case expressions:

```ruby
value = Maybe([nil, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].sample)

case value
when Some
  puts "Got Some: #{value.get}"
when None
  puts "Got None"
end
```

If the type of Maybe is Some, you can also match the value:

```ruby
value = Maybe([nil, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].sample)

case value
when Some(0)
  puts "Got zero"
when Some((1..3))
  puts "Got a low number: #{value.get}"
when Some((4..6))
  puts "Got a high number: #{value.get}"
when None
  puts "Got nothing"
end
```

For more complicated matching you can use Procs and lambdas. Proc class aliases #=== to the #call method. In practice this means that you can use Procs and lambdas in case expressions. It works also nicely with Maybe:

```ruby
even? = ->(a) { a % 2 == 0 }
odd? = ->(a) { a % 2 != 0 }

value = Maybe([nil, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].sample)

case value
when Some(even?)
  puts "Got even value: #{value.get}"
when Some(odd?)
  puts "Got odd value: #{value.get}"
when None
  puts "Got None"
end
```

## Examples

Instead of using if-clauses to define whether a value is a `nil`, you can wrap the value with `Maybe()` and threat it the same way whether or not it is a `nil`

Without Maybe():

```ruby
user = User.find_by_id(user_id)
number_of_friends = if user && user.friends
  user.friends.count
else
  0
end
```

With Maybe():

```ruby
number_of_friends = Maybe(User.find_by_id(user_id)).friends.count.or_else { 0 }
```

Same in HAML view, without Maybe():

```haml
- if @user && @user.friends
  = @user.friends.count
- else
  0
```

```haml
= Maybe(@user).friends.count.or_else { 0 }
```

## Tests

`rspec spec/spec.rb`

## License

[MIT](LICENSE)

## Authors

* [Blake Hyde](https://github.com/asthasr) / [@asthasr](http://twitter.com/asthasr)
* [Mikko Koski](https://github.com/rap1ds) / [@rap1ds](http://twitter.com/rap1ds)
